---
layout: category
title: 23-03-News
---

<div class="section">
<h3 class="section-title underline">March 2023 Newsletter</h3>
</div>

<p>Dear sed-DNA enthusiasts,</p>
<div class="intro">
<p>The last month of the meteorological winter has finished in the northern hemisphere - and the cold weather is slowly making way for nice spring weather. There is little to report from the sedaDNA society side, with no new papers published in the short month of February as far as I could see, but I am pretty sure people are working hard on producing new research papers. There is a good chance I sometimes miss some new papers or pre-prints, if you have any out, and you want to promote it in the newsletter, send me a message by either replying to the newsletter emails or messaging me on the society slack channel.
</p>

<p>
We will continue with more society e-coffee this year, Wednesday the 8th at 09:00 (UTC+2) and Wednesday the 22nd of March. Everyone is welcome to join Gathertown for a digital coffee and social chatting. Calendar invites will be sent a few days before via the email list and the society slack channel.
</p>

<br>
<div class="intro">
<h4 class="section-title underline">February Pacific society seminar</h4><p>

More information on the seminar series will follow.

<div class="intro">
  <br>

<h4 class="section-title underline">New Positions</h4>


<p>> A PhD position at Umeå University on the topic : deoxygenation in past and modern coastal systems and effects on microbial metabolisms. See <a href="https://ericcapo.github.io/ericcapo/category/research.html" target="_blank"><u> here </u></a> for few words about the project. The candidate will work both with water and sediment (sedDNA) samples from Norwegian fjords, Baltic Sea and likely other systems of interests. Candidate should have interest and background in (aquatic) microbial ecology and some experiences in molecular ecology would be great (but not mandatory). See here for more information
  <a href="https://www.umu.se/en/work-with-us/open-positions/phd-position-in-ecology-with-focus-on-aquatic-microbial-ecology_600714/" target="_blank"><u> here </u></a></p> 

<p><b>Application deadline: 31st March 2023</b></p>

<br>
  
<p>> The Sector Council for Research and Valorisation in Science and Techniques of ULiège provides a fellowship programme that supports qualified young incoming post-docs who want to develop their research at ULiege in Sciences, Technology, Engineering, Agro-Biotech, Materials (STEMA) and related disciplines for 2 years. See <a href="https://www.recherche.uliege.be/cms/c_13352123/en/ipd-stema" target="_blank"><u> https://www.recherche.uliege.be/cms/c_13352123/en/ipd-stema </u></a> and the Guide for applicants in appendix. 

We are looking for a suitable candidate interested to work in team of Annick Wilmotte, and if possible, with a link to the biodiversity of cyanobacteria in Polar Regions (projects <a href="https://www.belspo.be/belspo/brain2-be/projects/HabitAnt_E.pdf" target="_blank"><u> HabitANT </u></a> & Exposoils). It concerns scientists with PhD obtained after 1 October 2017 or being in a position to obtain his/ her doctoral degree before 15 September 2023.</p>
  
<p><b>The deadline for the call is 10 March 2023.</b></p>
<br>  
<p>> A<a href="https://www.jobbnorge.no/en/available-jobs/job/239568/phd-fellow-in-ancient-dna-of-cryptogams-in-northern-ecosystems" target="_blank"><u> PhD position in ancient DNA of cryptogams in northern ecosystems </u></a>is available at the Arctic University Museum of Norway, UiT. You will conduct research as a part of the newly established Norwegian Centre for Arctic Ecosystem Genomics (ArcEcoGen) and will be part of the terrestrial working group.</p>

<p>The position will focus on increasing our understanding of long-term changes in northern ecosystems with a focus on terrestrial and aquatic cryptogams. While we already have explored patterns of vascular plant and mammal sedimentary ancient DNA from many sites in the north, this position will extend the research to other parts of the ecosystem by exploring patterns in cryptogams, such as bryophytes, lichens and other fungi. These data will be explored to include trait analyses and other proxies, which will increase our understanding of different environmental drivers on ecosystem development and changes.</p>

<p>The position is for a period of four years. The nominal length of the PhD programme is three years. The fourth year is distributed as 25 % each year and will consist of teaching and other duties. The objective of the position is to complete research training to the level of a doctoral degree. Admission to the PhD programme is a prerequisite for employment, and the programme period starts on commencement of the position.</p>

<p><b>Application deadline: 9th March 2023</b></p>
<br> 
  <p>> The School of Geography & Environmental Science at the University of Southampton is seeking to appoint a fill-time permanent Lecturer position focused on developing sedimentary ancient DNA (sedaDNA) research within the School. Disciplinary specialties such include (but are not limited to) limnology, biogeochemistry, freshwater and/or terrestrial ecosystems, spatial ecology, global environmental change, palaeoclimatology and Quaternary research. All the details can be found <a href="https://jobs.soton.ac.uk/Vacancy.aspx?id=36807&forced=2" target="_blank"><u> here </u></a>.</p>
  
  <b>Application deadline: 16th March 2023</b></p>
  
<hr />
<p><small>Contact me at kevin_nota@eva.mpg.de or sedimentarydna@gmail.com if you want to announce something to the society, or if you have a recent paper that you would like to advertise in the newsletter.</small></p>


